---
title: "My work with Planet Computers, and why: Pt 1"
date: "2023-03-07"
---

## DISCLAIMER: As I have signed an NDA with Planet Computers, this post is of my own views, and NOT those of Planet Computers. They should not be contacted for comment.
## I am restricted in the information I can release, so please, no emails or DMs asking for information.

# UPDATE:

After careful consideration, I have chosen to discontinue this blog series. I
believe it would not have been able to fully cover the topic of Astro as
intended. Originally conceived to provide an overview of my engagement with
Planet, the series aimed to serve as a historical reference for interested
readers.

Regrettably, I encountered challenges in composing this blog post while
adhering to the non-disclosure agreement (NDA) I am bound by.

I trust that some individuals may have found the series engaging.

# Original post:

[expand]

~~I thought, in light of the "Planet Embedded" XR-series that has been launched,
it might be a good idea for me to explain my affiliation with the company
behind it, the Gemini PDA, Cosmo Communicator, and their latest phone (but
sadly not the latest SoC; this is a blessing in a way, more in future posts),
Astro Slide 5G Transformer.~~

~~To begin this post, I think it necessary to explain where my work with Planet
started. It started shortly after I received my Cosmo Communicator via
IndieGoGo (one of my first crowdfunding campaigns). I was very curious about
CoDi, and there wasn't much information surrounding the system driving it. I
had already observed many deficiencies with CoDi, and had worked it out it was
over UART. But UART is slow, and this, I felt, was the reason behind the slow -
what turned out to be XMODEM - update process on the bootloader.~~

~~I was trying my best to contact the development team behind CoDi and only
reached Customer Care. By lucky chance, I managed to get hold of the brilliant
Davide Guidi, with whom we communicated over email before moving to IM.~~

~~Davide and I communicated extensively, and I met Dr Janko and the CoDi
developer plus Davide over a Zoom call, which was productive. Davide was an
integral driving force behind Planet Computers, who had a vision, and tried
hard to help the community.~~

~~I seem to recall he was the one who released the initial SailfishOS build to
the community, with help from Nikita (for those who don't know, Adam Boardman,
Nikita (NotKit/TheKit), Sean, and I are the main *active* community
developers), which was basic and hasn't seen much love since he [Davide] left.~~

~~Davide worked on the `codi-app` repository which was moved to the Gemian
organisation, and I forked it since then, to use proper Python techniques,
which will hopefully - if Adam and Nikita approve - be merged into Gemian, and
maybe we can replace `codi-app` with the CoDi daemon `codid`, my Rust version.~~

~~But that's a digression. I suppose the next logical step I had with CoDi was
because the design partner and a proprietary GUI library are involved with the
codebase, it made sense to replace the firmware on the STM32L4R9AIIX with an
open-source version. But the question was, which language? I was aware of the
issues on CoDi with transliteration encoding, which would be a major factor if
I chose to use something like C, or C++.~~

~~I settled on Rust, with a built-from-the-ground-up, minimal real-time
interrupt-driven microkernel, which felt like the best language and design, as
it would save battery, be secure against exploits, ensure memory-safety, and
support Unicode (specifically, UTF-8) from the start, meaning snazzy emojis on
CoDi! Just kidding. Maybe. I'm not too fond of Emojis, but the UTF-8 support
was there, and we could choose to have emojis on CoDi.~~

~~This blog post is getting a little long now, and I've been on holiday in
Geneva. As I write this and sign off, I'm on a plane back home, which was close
to being cancelled today (7th of March 2023), due to the French strikes.~~

~~I will leave the blog post here, as it's a bit cramped on the plane.~~

~~Au revoir!~~

[/expand]
